Thoms' changes to intro (#60)
DanNixon/sine2020_software_guidelines_paper: guidelines_for_collaborative_development_of_sustainable_data_treatment_software.tex

Hence, more and more users are not knowledgeable about the details behind the neutron and muon data treatment and  do not have the technical skills in how to analyse their data.
The second reason is that the advances in science are demanding increasingly greater amounts of data that cannot be analysed by hand.
For example, some instruments at the

> European Spallation Source  ERIC (ESS) are estimated to have data rates in the order of gigabytes per second \cite{Christensen_2018}, which is significantly higher than at existing neutron sources. 

Author: whats ERIC?

Reviewer: European Research Infrastructure Consortium. It is used like Ltd A/S AB, Inc. etc, but is a Pan-European corporation structure (very complicated).

Reviewer: I guess it is okay to remove ERIC in this context.

Author: ```suggestion
European Spallation Source ESS) are estimated to have data rates in the order of gigabytes per second \cite{Christensen_2018}, which is significantly higher than at existing neutron sources. 
```

> Still, this level of data production is relatively small compared to other types of large-scale physics facilities, such as free electron lasers and the large hadron collider. 

Author: ```suggestion
This can be compared to the data rates from ten years ago, where (\todo{TODO: Historic example}).
In some fields of scientific research the level of data production is far greater, for example free electron lasers and the Large Hadron Collider. 
It is not unreasonable to assume that with advancing technology that neutron and muon facilities will produce similarly vast quantities of data.
```
Im not convinced the second part is relevant.

Reviewer: I guess the point is that we need to handle more data than before. Don't you have something at ISIS? Maybe we can get something from ILL. However, it is not essential. 

I agree with the changes.

The growing complexity of both data reduction and analysis means that the development of scientific software requires increasingly more resources.
The consequence of these aspects is that users will inherently depend on software created by other developers, typically in the user community or at the hosting facilities.

> A developer may also choose to contribute to existing software rather than develop her own from scratch.

Author: ```suggestion
A developer may also choose to contribute to existing software rather than develop their own from scratch.
```

This adds significant requirements in terms of quality, trustability, reliability, reproducibility and usability compared to when users develop software for their own use.
(TODO: insert \cite{computational-science-error} and articles about reproducibility)

> It also adds requirements to inter-operability if software developed by one set of developers (e.g., at a university) should be adaptable by other developers (e.g., at a facility). 

Author: ```suggestion
It also adds requirements to inter-operability if software developed by one set of developers (e.g. at a university) should be adaptable by other developers (e.g. at a facility). 
```
I'm not sure what this is trying to say.

Reviewer: Interoperability means that something developed in one place can be used somewhere else or can be adapted easily. Facilitating this is one of the main objectives of the guidelines. I guess I was trying to make a point about this without changing too much.

Author: I think we could say Thomas' point in a more clear way

> In the case of data treatment, new methods are often developed in academia and it is therefore highly desirable if associated software can be readily adapted by facilities for the benefits of their users.

Author: ```suggestion
New methods for data treatment are often developed in academia. 
Therefore, it would be beneficial to the broader community if the new methods could be easily incorporated into facilities' software.
```

Reviewer: good

\end{itemize}
That way it will be easier to continue growing the code base to include new functionality to the current scientific analysis techniques and to expand into new areas of analysis/research.
It would also reduce the effort required to adapt the software for use at other facilities.

> There is plenty of literature discussing different aspects of software development, which these days is a scientific and engineering discipline in its own right. 

Author: ```suggestion

There is plenty of literature discussing different aspects of software development, which these days is a scientific and engineering discipline in its own right. 
```

Reviewer: ok, although I don't see an issue with pointing out that the art of software engineering and development has become a very big field in its own right.

> Indeed, the question about how to ensure that software is of high quality and reliable has been discussed for the last 50 years \cite{scientific_fortran, fair_software} and these days there are initiatives like CodeRefinery \cite{coderefinery} and the Software Sustainability Institute \cite{SoftwareSustainabilityInstitute} with the aim to promote best practise for the development of academic software \cite{fair_software}. 

Author: ```suggestion
Initiatives such as  CodeRefinery \cite{coderefinery} and the Software Sustainability Institute \cite{SoftwareSustainabilityInstitute} promote best practises for the development of academic software \cite{fair_software}.  
```

Reviewer: Ok with reformulating but don't leave out the scientific_fortran reference.

Questions related to reliability of software have been discussed for the last 50 years \cite{...}.
Today, initiatives such as ..

Author: I thought I got all 3 of them. Which one is missing?

Reviewer 2: It's unclear what the first half of this sentence is supposed to say. Could you elaborate on this is more detail?

> A particular concern is the (lack of) reproducibility and reliability of results derived from software developed in a community with no strong tradition for best practice software development. 

Author: ```suggestion
With the move towards FAIR data, a particular concern for scientists is the  reproducibility and reliability of results.
```

Reviewer: The R stands fo Reusable and not reproducable - but many would like it to be reproducable.

I'm a little torn about Anthony's suggestion because it sort of implies that without the move towards FAIR data it would be less of a concern, which is obviously wrong.  Reproducibility and reliability have always been a concern in science independent of FAIR -  also for scientific software as illustrated with the scientific_fortran reference.

Author: It was meant to be a statement of it was one of the main concerns. I will have another go at rewording this at some point

> A fact, which is often enhanced by the frequent turnover of PhD students and post docs, who often are the main developers and often working for themselves .... (TODO: citations).

Author: ```suggestion
These concerns are in part rooted in the rapid replacement of developers, in the form of PhD students and post-docs.  
These developers often work in isolated conditions with limited knowledge of previous developments and the reasoning for them.
```

Reviewer: very good

> Many academic groups and research infrastructures have realized this and have started to adapt best practise software development or encouraging it by publishing or proposing guidelines for aspects of software development ( e.g., for coding \cite{Green_2011}), specific programs (please see Mantid \cite{mantidguidelines} for an example), or for specific domains \cite{medical-informatics}, \cite{Silvia_2017} (TODO: add reference for archeology).

Author: I have no idea what this is trying to say

> The authors of this article represent data treatment groups or activities at five major European neutron sources.

Author: I dont think this is relevant

Reviewer: elaborate please

Author: This information is at the start of the paper in the author and affiliation list. I don't see how it adds anything to this part of the paper to state it again here.

> It is therefore our hope that the presented guidelines can "unite" the community around a set of rules that foster the sharing and development of sustainable and maintainable user software of a high quality. 

Author: haven't we done this b creating the guidelines at the start of SINE2020?

Reviewer: Have we? I would say that at most the partners in WP10 (i.e. the people directly involved), but not the community at large. I don't even think we can say that the facilities involved in WP10 adhere to these guidelines. That would be the same as saying that there will not be new matlab projects for data treatment at ISIS.

> It is therefore our hope that the presented guidelines can "unite" the community around a set of rules that foster the sharing and development of sustainable and maintainable user software of a high quality. 

Author: Im just not keen on the wording, it sounds very part political to me

> It is therefore our hope that the presented guidelines can "unite" the community around a set of rules that foster the sharing and development of sustainable and maintainable user software of a high quality. 

Reviewer: Ok, we should find some different wording then. Our motivation for presenting these guidelines ...

Indeed, the specific guidelines presented in Section~\ref{SINE2020} were developed as part of the project

> World leading

Author: this doesn't make sense

Reviewer: elaborate please?

\underline{S}cience and 
\underline{I}nnovation with
\underline{N}eutrons in
\underline{E}urope in
\underline{2020} 
(SINE2020, \cite{sine2020}) with the aim of fostering development of high-quality user software,  collaborations, sharing of software, and contributions from third party developers (e.g., from university groups) through the development of inter-operable software. 
If the guidelines are followed, it will be easier for (another) facility to adapt the software for their own needs and that of their user community, but also for other developers to contribute to the software. 

The specific guidelines for the muon and neutron community are based on an analysis of existing practice for software considered in SINE2020, namely  BornAgain \cite{bornagain}, Mantid \cite{mantid}, ImagingSuite \cite{ImagingSuite}, McStas \cite{mcstas} and SasView \cite{sasview}.

> Some of the projects have been started and maintained by a single scientist and some have been initiated and promoted by a research institute rather than an individual.

Author: this should be multiple sentences

Reviewer: I guess we can remove the last sentence

Reviewer: and we can split in more sentences

> Consequently, these software projects have a broad range of team sizes: from a couple of developers working very closely on a single piece of software to wide international collaborations (c.f., Section \ref{SINE2020}). 

Author: ```suggestion
Consequently, these software projects have a broad range of team sizes: from a couple of developers working very closely on a single piece of software to wide international collaborations (see Section \ref{SINE2020}). 
```

Reviewer: ok

> The commonalities are however sufficiently significant for developing a specific set of guidelines for development of data treatment software for the neutron and muon community. 

Author: I think there is a better way to say this

Reviewer: Probably, in light of the new SINE2020 section some of it can probably also be left out.

Author: which bit can we remove?

These guidelines are presented in Section \ref{SINE2020}. 
To put those rather specific guidelines in context we start with a presentation and discussion of some more generic guidelines along with a discussion of challenges commonly faced in software development that these guidelines address.

> 

Author: I think these last two lines are very important and should be kept

Reviewer: I suggest to put them back in and let's see how it reads.

That way it will be easier to continue growing the code base to include new functionality to the current scientific analysis techniques and to expand into new areas of analysis/research.
It would also reduce the effort required to adapt the software for use at other facilities.

There is plenty of literature discussing different aspects of software development, spanning the last 50 years \cite{ scientific_fortran, fair_software}.
Initiatives such as  CodeRefinery \cite{coderefinery} and the Software Sustainability Institute \cite{SoftwareSustainabilityInstitute} promote best practises for the development of academic software \cite{fair_software}.  
With the move towards FAIR data, concerns about the reproducibility and reliability of data has become even more important to scientists.
These concerns are in part rooted in the rapid replacement of developers, in the form of PhD students and post-docs.  
These developers often work in isolated conditions with limited knowledge of previous developments and the reasoning for them.

> Many academic groups and research infrastructures have realized this and have started to adapt best practise software development or encouraging it by publishing or proposing guidelines for aspects of software development ( e.g., for coding \cite{Green_2011}), specific programs (please see Mantid \cite{mantidguidelines} for an example), or for specific domains \cite{medical-informatics}, \cite{Silvia_2017} (TODO: add reference for archeology).

Author: ```suggestion
Many academic groups and research infrastructures are now starting to follow guidelines when writing software. 
```

> The authors of this article represent data treatment groups or activities at five major European neutron sources.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> It is therefore our hope that the presented guidelines can "unite" the community around a set of rules that foster the sharing and development of sustainable and maintainable user software of a high quality. 

Author: ```suggestion
The aim of this paper is to allow scientific software communities to benefit from good software practices.
Each individual community may use different guidelines, some of which may already exist and others can be specific to a particular project. 
```

> Indeed, the specific guidelines presented in Section~\ref{SINE2020} were developed as part of the project

Author: ```suggestion
In Section~\ref{SINE2020}, guidelines are presented that were developed as part of the 
```

> World leading

Author: ```suggestion
```

\underline{S}cience and 
\underline{I}nnovation with
\underline{N}eutrons in
\underline{E}urope in
\underline{2020} 

> (SINE2020, \cite{sine2020}) with the aim of fostering development of high-quality user software,  collaborations, sharing of software, and contributions from third party developers (e.g., from university groups) through the development of inter-operable software. 

Author: ```suggestion
(SINE2020, \cite{sine2020}).
The aim of these guidelines was to foster development of high-quality user software,  collaborations and contributions from third party developers (e.g. from university groups) through the development of inter-operable software. 
```

If the guidelines are followed, it will be easier for (another) facility to adapt the software for their own needs and that of their user community, but also for other developers to contribute to the software. 

The specific guidelines for the muon and neutron community are based on an analysis of existing practice for software considered in SINE2020, namely  BornAgain \cite{bornagain}, Mantid \cite{mantid}, ImagingSuite \cite{ImagingSuite}, McStas \cite{mcstas} and SasView \cite{sasview}.

> Some of the projects have been started and maintained by a single scientist and some have been initiated and promoted by a research institute rather than an individual.

Author: ```suggestion
These projects have a wide range of backgrounds. 
For example, some are maintained by an individual and others by large international teams. 
```

> Consequently, these software projects have a broad range of team sizes: from a couple of developers working very closely on a single piece of software to wide international collaborations (see Section \ref{SINE2020}). 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> The commonalities are however sufficiently significant for developing a specific set of guidelines for development of data treatment software for the neutron and muon community. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> These guidelines are presented in Section \ref{SINE2020}. 

Author: ```suggestion
```
